# Haplotype effects
We estimated the additive effect of the founder haplotypes (AJ, 129, NZO, PWK, B6, NOD, CAST, and WSB) on lifespan, HDW, and RDW by modeling the genotype dosages as random effects. Using this approach, genetic effects are obtained as best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPs), which are constrained compared to fixed effects, stabilizing and preventing them from being driven by rare alleles or outlying trait values. We did this across the entirety of chromosome 18 for lifespan, 7-month RDW, and 7-month HDW. 

For lifespan, there appears to a beneficial (increased lifespan) effect contributed by WSB and 129 and an adverse (reduced lifespan) effect contributed by CAST and potentially NOD (see full_chr18_BLUP_scans_LS_RDW_HDW.pdf). For 7-month RDW and HDW, CAST has similarly adverse (increased levels) effects. WSB, 129, and NOD do not appear to influence, 7-month RDW, but they may have a slight effect on 7-month HDW that is consistent with their effects on lifespan.

In addition to performing the chromosome-wide estimates for lifespan and 7-month HDW and RDW, we similarly estimated the effects of the founder haplotypes at each of the chromosome 18 peaks (lifespan 10.78 Mb, 7-month HDW 17.06 Mb, 13-month HDW 16.12 Mb, 7-month RDW 15.83, 19-month 17.65 Mb) on lifespan and RDW and HDW at every timepoint. We then estimated the correlation between the lifespan effects and the RDW and HDW effects. At the majority of the peaks, the lifespan and RDW or HDW effects are negatively correlated (see allele_coefs_at_lifespan_locus_peak.pdf, allele_coefs_at_RDW07_locus_peak.pdf, allele_coefs_at_RDW19_locus_peak.pdf, allele_coefs_at_HDW07_locus_peak.pdf, and allele_coefs_at_HDW13_locus_peak.pdf). This is consistent with the demonstrated negative correlations between lifespan and both RDW and HDW. At all the peaks, the effect of CAST allele on lifespan, RDW, and HDW at every timepoint is clear and consistent. Additionally, at the lifespan peak (10.78 Mb), the effects of CAST, NOD, WSB, and 129 on 7-month HDW are remarkably consistent with their effects on lifespan (see allele_coefs_at_lifespan_locus_peak.pdf).


